---
layout: post
title:  "Icons and the observable phenomena."
excerpt: "The way we draw or otherwise  visually or symbolically 'represent' the observed phenomena influences our intuitions in a way that is not always productive and sometimes is outright wrong as in the case of 'arrows' and polar / axial vectors."
date:   2019-03-04  8:11 am
categories: blog posts
---

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Some time ago I bumped into a book that forced me to discover a whole new world view, contrary to the 'traditional' view still predominant in our contemporary science, especially among the 'theoretical physicists' and mathematicians. It has a confusing name 'realism' (ha-ha-ha!) and it doesn't mean what you think! What can be confusing about that, you may ask? The confusion is in the answer to the question: 'what is real?' The so called 'realists' don't say that there is some kind of a 'nature' and there are some 'natural phenomena' out there that are _**real**_ as one might think. Nothing of the kind! They claim that the _**icons**_, which may be drawings, cryptic symbols (hi, Russell and Whitehead) or 'formulas' that they chose for representation of the observed phenomena are 'real', the conjectured definitions of their behaviour under changing conditions are 'real' in the sense that they map onto something that necessarily _can_ happen in reality. And, of course, the results of their arithmetical and not so arithmetical (but always tautological) manipulations with these icons that will be done by the selected few who 'understand' the 'true meaning' (of these icons) is _**real**_. Really? Are they? What you wrote on your wrinkled piece of paper is _**guaranteed**_ to map onto something in the real world? You are saying that it is _**bound**_ to exist because you used summation and multiplication derived from counting distinctely different items to electromagnetic fields flying across the Universe? Yeah! Right! I can see what kind of a 'realist' you are, ha-ha-ha!<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Back to my story about the book(s) I read. It's a relatively old book, from 1992, by a British professor Simon L. Altmann, called "Icons and Symmetries" (from it I discovered his other book "Rotations, Quaternions and Double groups" and the book by Elie Cartan "The Theory of Spinors"). He, by his book, made me realise once again, that the way we draw or otherwise  visually or symbolically 'represent' the observed phenomena influences our intuitions in a way that is not always productive and sometimes is outright wrong. His story was about Oersted, the cult of Hamilton, the 'Rodrigues construction' for consequitive rotations and on and on to spinors with a point that they are more fundamental than both types of vectors and why.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The point that we should _never_ forget is that whatever we draw, whatever we say or write about the observable phenomena are just metaphors. They are created by our brain and are some vague 'approximation' (of reality) constructed by it. Sometimes these metaphors are 'spot on' (or at least we still think so today), sometimes they are useful in some situations but lead to errors and misunderstandings in other... as in this case with polar and axial vectors that he is discussing.
#### 'Sicilian defence' in the time of AlphaZero.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;As you sail in the sea of knowledge you constantly bump into terminology that had been created a long time ago by some people who had their own view of the world and motivations, they were surrounded by a different world with different stories (and sometimes were using them as metaphors to explain their ideas as in the case of Aristotle who cites "Cresphontes", a play by Euripides that no longer exists, in one of his texts that I talked about). We use symbolic names or names of their authors for complex constructs or methods of thought. This is one of the features of our civilization and at the same time a mnemonic rule of producing 'stenographic signs' and using them to communicate ideas.
<br><br>
#### What was useful
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The points that were particularly useful:
1. This Hamilton's BS mixing matices-objects and matrices-transforms is just that - BS, as I always felt. It would be good to write about it separately, probably in conjunction with the time dimension explanations.
2. The real method should be much stranger than what the ancient philosophers envisioned, namely: after our manipulations with formulas we come to a 'conclusion', then we return to the metaphysics of the phenomenon and fix it, then we go back to experiment and rebuild it based on the new metaphysics, then we change the metaphor based on the result of the new experiment. Sounds very strange. The name 'meta-induction' for description of this process comes to mind immediately.
3. Distances as matrices and distances as graphs / trees are an idea that keeps coming to my mind over and over again. Maybe it's time to write a paper about them.
<br><br>
Books:<br>
Simon L. Altmann - "Icons and Symmetries"<br> 
Altmann - "Rotations, Quaternions and Double groups"<br>
Elie Cartan - "The Theory of Spinors"<br>
Penrose, Rindler - "Spinors and space-time. vv. 1,2"<br><br>
Later.
