---
layout: post
title:  "Meta-language, terminology, what it is now and what it should be."
excerpt: "I disagree with the conventional meaning of the term 'metalanguage' that had been invented around 1950-s and here's what I propose."
date:   2019-02-01  9:42 am
categories: blog posts
---
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I disagree with the definition of the word 'metalanguage' given here: [Wikipedia definition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metalanguage) - as a language for __*description*__ of languages. I want to use this or other term for talking about the _meaning_ of what is being expressed by a language. In other words I want to discuss "why?" or better to say "what for?" all these humans and machines use those particular words, phrases and sentences? What are their intentions and how these intentions can be represented in a meaningful way? How are these intentions translated into words? These are the questions similar to the Plato's understanding of 'metaphysics' as something beyond the description of observable physical phenomena, the _meaning_ of physics, described in the books of the treatise past/following the book named 'Physics'.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Because of all this I decided to use the hyphened form of the word 'meta-language' in my work that will be devoted to what I've just said - the combinations of mental meanings and intentions of the parties, communicating with the help of language. And it will be in the virtual organization [meta-language](https://github.com/meta-language)<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;My understanding is probably in some sense much closer to what is described in this wikipedia article as [Compiler-compiler](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compiler-compiler). And I agree with its constructive approach: defining a meta-language should result in creating a 'compiler' that can, in its turn, compile a 'parser'/'interpreter' and 'decompile' this 'compiler' back from the instance of the parser.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Another example is Goedel. He was talking about a simple thing: logic is fully devoted to 1.5 'meta' ideas that are being expressed by _all_ of its language, namely: the idea of truth (or falsehood) and the half-idea of sequence of combinations some of which are true and some are not. Of course this description of what is true and what is false in 'beyond' the language itself! It's obvious. :) and in this way 'True' and 'False' are the words of meta-language describing the statements and sequences of statements of the language (of arithmetics). And probably this is where the present understanding of the term comes from, because you can arguably call _this_ particular act of assigning a (True/False) __*meaning*__ to the objects expressing it in the Goedel language scheme a 'description' of sorts.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What I was trying to express in these brief several paragraphs is: as in many other cases of contemporary scholastic pseudo-science the carriage is in front of the hourse, instead of understanding and rationally systematising the combinatorics of _meaning_ and its transformation into texts and speech let's indefinitely examine the combinatorics of the words symbolizing (allegedly unknown) meanings. The little boy's question is of course:"Why are you saying that the meanings are "unknown"? We are speaking to each other and understanding each other. I understand what you've just said." And this manipulation of symbolic representations of real objects as if they _are_ those objects is a quintessential scholastics!<br>
Later.
