---
layout: post
title:  "Machine-Learning how to Machine-Cheat."
excerpt: "What exactly are these machines 'learning' when we are 'teaching' them? What type of machine-behavior of machines and humans servicing them are our 'teaching' methods encouraging?"
date:   2019-02-10  8:19 am
categories: blog posts
---
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Somehow, as always, nobody seems to ask the right question, namely: "What are we __*teaching*__ our machines when they are 'machine-learning'"? What type of behavior are we encouraging or discouraging? How does it allign with our overall goals and particular (and momentary) expectations? Let's look into it in a little bit of a detail.<br>

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Let's watch the hands of the prestidigitator closely, maybe we will be able to notice where the rabbit comes from if we watch it in slow motion:
- Step 1: We show an object to our 'machine-pupil' (the stupid britanism 'pupil' with it's second purely physiological meaning fits beautifully here);
- Step 2: We let the machine to make a 'guess' based on what it has 'learned' before;
- Step 3: We show the so called 'label' to another side of the machine and let it 'backpropagate the error';
- Step 3: We 'reinforce' ('reward' in some way) the closeness or the guess;
- Step 4: The numerous and well paid personnel of the facility filled with expensive computer equipment sold to you by "the most innovative manufacturer in the World" as it calls itself, keeps repeating this procedure like a 'well oiled machine'... in perpetuity.<br>

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Remember _how_ we were taught in school? Maybe this is the time to remember what happened when we were kids and take a look at what we are doing now to our machines? How did you learn? I remember myself learning, I remember what I was taught _not_ to do and that's exactly where we should start this excurtion into our past.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The completely forbidden practice was to look up the answer to a problem that you were given before you at least had _tried_ to solve it yourself by _reasoning_ in a prescribed way about the substance of the problem. The prohibition went as far as removing the pages with answers to the problems from the books in the school library. The main task was to _understand_ the problem and be able to _explain_ it in your own words, show the **causes** at play in the context offered by the problem and develop a plan of action that would let you predict the **effect(s)** and in this way start _solving_ the problem.<br><br>
**What do we force our machines to do?** - Not only we do not let them to _deliberate_ about the substance of the problem - we show them the answer (that very 'label' that we were just talking about) and force them to ingest it. And that is not all.<br><br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Remember when your teacher was saying to you:"Sit down, you are just __guessing__ (the right answer)." Did your teacher of mathematics or physics say that to you? Mine did! And I was really good at it too, by the way, somehow I could imagine the space-time picture of pretty complex phenomena in motion that I could (and still can) fast-forward or rewind and scale, rotate and shift and see from any angle. I'm not as good at it as Ramanujan or something, but I was pretty awesome compared to my classmates (and the teacher lady herself) then,- I can only imagine how annoying it was for her. She would never let me to express in words these pictures that I saw 'in front of my inner eyes' or draw them the way I wanted, because that wouldn't be a drawing in the prescribed format of 'isometric projection'.<br><br>
**What do we force our machines to do?** - Not only we do not let them to _deliberate_ about their 'visions' we are trying to minimize the circuit as much as possible. Why? Because we want an indefinite repetition of the process, of course!<br><br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Now a little bit about plotting, graphs and all that. The gravest sin in my early adult life when I was working in the Physics Institute was to 'fit the data to the curve' or 'fit the curve to the data' without _any_ explanation or even reasoning __*why*__ this particular change in parameters or exclusion of points from the experimental data should be done. And there is a reason for that. Pretty much all the newly discovered phenomena in Physics were first considered to be 'experimental errors'. I want to stop here for a moment, because it's important. If a data point spoils the 'good agreement with the experiment' of the analytic curve that is based on formula that you pulled straight out of your ass it can mean two things: it can be an error in your experiment... say a cockroach moved with his growing family from the power supply of your oscilloscope to the amplifier plug-in of it; or it can be a sheer luck of bumping into something that you don't know! That's why physicists despize people who drop the 'weird' data points.<br><br>
**What do we force our machines to do?** - We deceive them by not showing them the _real_ (complete) data, we 'massage' the data until the 'fitting' gives a desired result by excluding and including (called 'bootstrping', invented by Wald) data points and calling the point that has been excluded an 'outlier'. No, this point is _not_ an 'outlier', _you_ are a liar! So, basically we force our machines to process an incomplete or outright wrong data, we lie to them about the World. Well, most of my teachers did that (intentionally) too, but nonetheless.<br><br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What a mess, people! You do this and expect some kind of a 'generalization'? Really? The whole 'Machine-Learning' thing is teaching our machines how to 'Machine-Cheat' not how to generalize. 
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Why is this happening? Because we tend to **shift** the tasks that we are _prohibited_ from doing _ourself_: cheating, 'massaging the data' in any and every inappropriate way, drawing unjustifiably wrong graphs, even race-gender-or-anything-else discriminating in cases when it is legally prohibited... and all this goes to our machines and they will be 'to blame'. Nice. I can understand why, I perfectly understand _all_ the 'incentives' and 'motivations', but this is just not right. This will not work like this for long, believe me. Sooner or later the lies and the liars will be exposed, kicked out and punished with oblivion.<br>
### What should be done now?
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Enough of this critique of impure unreasonableness! Let's talk about the constructive program and where it should start and how it will begin, now.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;If you noticed all the memories of the learning process that we were talking about reside at a 'meta' level, we are not talking about particular problems we are talking about the problems in general and we are using a meta-language that has the following words:
* **problem** - the singled out set of circumstances that can be discussed separately (from the context of the Universe :) );
* **understanding of the problem** - the ability to mentally grasp all the important aspects of the problem and express the meaning of these aspects in one or several different ways;
* **deliberation** - the logical argument about the ideas related to the problem or any of its parts;
* **solution** - the logical conclusion of the deliberations about the problem.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Basically, what we should be doing is: to enourage the meta-learning, the learning of the methods of aquisition of principles... and these three "of" in a row in this phrase symbolise just that - the "meta" level of the task.<br><br>

I created a couple of virtual organizations for this topic... as always :)... in https://github.com/machine-teaching and https://github.com/teaching-machine-to-learn.<br><br>
Later.
